KNIP-1770: Add proposal for exporting local storage device health metrics (#838)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/local-storage/health-monitoring.md

---
title: local-device-health-monitoring
authors:
  - "@rohantmp"
reviewers:
  - "@gnufied"
  - "@jsafrane”
  - "@sp98"
  
approvers:
  - "@gnufied"
  - "@jsafrane"
creation-date: 2021-07-16
last-updated: 2021-07-16
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Local Device Health Monitoring

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This enhancement proposes that we export health metrics for each local device on each node. 

## Motivation

> Local device vendors expose health information about storage devices via APIs like [SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.). It very useful to know when a storage is about to fail, to differentiate between storage relate errors vs purely software ones, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local device vendors expose health information about storage devices via APIs like [SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.). It very useful to know when a storage is about to fail, to differentiate between storage hardware related errors vs purely software ones, etc.
```

### Non-Goals

- Align with sig-storage [health monitoring for persistent volumes](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/04/16/volume-health-monitoring-alpha-update/)
    - justification: it is also useful to monitor system drives and CSI only deals with persitent volumes, and migrating to CSI is an extremely long term effort.
 

## Proposal

[Local Storage Operator](https://github.com/openshift/local-storage-operator) currently deploys multiple daemonsets and enumerates local-storage. We could export per-disk metrics from the same daemonset.

### User Stories

- As an admin, I would like to be alerted when a storage device is unhealthy and be linked to remediation steps.
- As an admin, I would like if components (such as OpenShift Data Foundation) could access storage device health and failover faster.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

`LocalVolumeDisocveryResults` already enumerate and refresh information about the disk in a per-node `LocalVolumeDiscoveryResult`, and a [PR](https://github.com/openshift/local-storage-operator/pull/249) is in progress to add metrics to each of the daemonsets that update the CR.

> `LocalVolumeDiscovery` can be configured via `nodeSelector` and `toleration` to match any set of nodes or all nodes. We could have the metrics be for all nodes or just for the ones that LocalVolumeDiscovery is configured to watch. Whether this should be controlled by the same (singleton) CR is an [open question](#Open-Questions    )

Reviewer 2: are we planning to provide metrics for all the disks? Even those that are not used by LSO?

Author: yes, I'll add that

- The golang bindings for libstoragemgmgt also needs some review and polish.
    - Mitigation: The ODF(OpenShift Data Foundation) team will contribute to and help the RHEL team maintain libstoragemgmt golang

## Design Details

### Open Questions

- Is Local Storage Operator the best place for this?
  - see [alternatives](#Alternatives)
- Should we allow configuration to watch only a subset of nodes or watch all nodes by default? Should the metrics be controller by LocalVolumeDiscovery (singleton)

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

- E2E tests will deploy the component and verify that metrics are being emitted per device

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

- We explored node_exporter, but it is a rootless container, so SMART data can't be checked.

> - We considered node-problem-detector, but it doesn't export metrics only sets node conditions and creates events.

Reviewer 3: IMHO node-problem.detector is using cluster level data to detect problems, but not by itself export node level data

Author: Agreed, just included it because it was brought up frequently and I've included why we chose not to use it. Should I put it in another section?

Reviewer 4: > IMHO node-problem.detector is using cluster level data to detect problems, but not by itself export node level data.

I do not understand this. node-problem-detector runs a daemon on each node and reports data/metrics from the nodes. I do not think it uses cluster level data.

> - We *could* create a new component for this.

Reviewer 3: I'm missing some reasoning of why LSO is _not_ the right place.

While I agree that other components can own disks of a host, LSO is one of them, thus it looks like to be like a good starting point at least. The good is alos that LSO can correlate it to PVs

Reviewer 4: In general argument against including these metrics in LSO is - LSO is not a general purpose disk management solution. It exists to allow creation of PVs from user selected disks. In other words - it only concerns itself with PV creation from selected disks and if task was to monitor health of PVs that LSO creates, it would be a suitable place to add health checks. 

In this case though - task is to monitor health of all disks, including root disk, boot disk etc and in which case - LSO does not seem like a suitable place to report such data.  There are some advantages of keeping LSO lightweight and easier to maintain and using it as a kitchen sink makes maintenance difficult.

Author: @gnufied I'm not sure I understand the consequences, the solution has to be maintained somewhere. Can you clarify the possible negative situations from putting it in LSO so I can put it in the enhancement?

Reviewer 5: If LSO creates PVs from local disks, I think it seems to be the place to monitor health of those disks as well. Like Rohan, I haven't quite understood the argument against adding this feature to LSO.

---
title: local-device-health-monitoring
authors:
  - "@rohantmp"
reviewers:
  - "@gnufied"
  - "@jsafrane”
  - "@sp98"
  
approvers:
  - "@gnufied"
  - "@jsafrane"
creation-date: 2021-07-16
last-updated: 2021-07-16
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Local Device Health Monitoring

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This enhancement proposes that we export health metrics for each local device on each node.

## Motivation

Local device vendors expose health information about storage devices via APIs like [SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.). It very useful to know when a storage is about to fail, to differentiate between storage hardware related errors vs purely software ones, etc.

### Goals

> - Expose health information about local storage devices in a way that can generate alerts

Reviewer 6: Is the plan to expose everything or is there a subset of the data we know would be most useful?

Author: Currently, the discussion has been around a simple boolean. Normal/Abnormal (lifting those terms from the CSI implementation). I'll add a more fleshed out design for the metrics ASAP

### Non-Goals

- Align with sig-storage [health monitoring for persistent volumes](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/04/16/volume-health-monitoring-alpha-update/)
  - justification: it is also useful to monitor system drives and CSI only deals with persitent volumes, and migrating to CSI is an extremely long term effort.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 7: I'd appreciate definition of "device heath" here (or below). It can be very different thing to different people.

### User Stories

- As an admin, I would like to be alerted when a storage device is unhealthy and be linked to remediation steps.
- As an admin, I would like if components (such as OpenShift Data Foundation) could access storage device health and failover faster.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

`LocalVolumeDisocveryResults` already enumerate and refresh information about the disk in a per-node `LocalVolumeDiscoveryResult`, and a [PR](https://github.com/openshift/local-storage-operator/pull/249) is in progress to add metrics to each of the daemonsets that update the CR.

`LocalVolumeDiscovery` can be configured via `nodeSelector` and `toleration` to match any set of nodes or all nodes. We could have the metrics be for all nodes or just for the ones that LocalVolumeDiscovery is configured to watch. Whether this should be controlled by the same (singleton) CR is an [open question](#Open-Questions    )

We will be collecting metrics via [libstoragemgmt](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt) and calling it via [libstoragemgmt-golang](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt-golang/).

> If a block device is a partion or logical volume, we will only expose health for the parent device.

Reviewer 7: In case of LVM it can be array of devices. Whose health will be reported?

Author: I guess this was for when we were considering per-PV metrics. LVM volumes count as a logical volume. We wouldn't expose metrics for them, just their parents.

- The golang bindings for libstoragemgmgt also needs some review and polish.
  - Mitigation: The ODF(OpenShift Data Foundation) team will contribute to and help the RHEL team maintain libstoragemgmt golang

## Design Details

### Open Questions

- Is Local Storage Operator the best place for this?
  - see [alternatives](#Alternatives)
- Should we allow configuration to watch only a subset of nodes or watch all nodes by default? Should the metrics be controller by LocalVolumeDiscovery (singleton)

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

- E2E tests will deploy the component and verify that metrics are being emitted per device

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview -> GA

#### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

## Alternatives

- We *could* create a new component for this.

Disqualified alternatives:

> - We explored node_exporter, but it is a rootless container, so SMART data can't be checked.

Reviewer 6: Why can't node exporter be made to run as root?

Author: My understanding is that upstream won't go for it based on [this issue](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter/issues/782#issuecomment-356160910) and asking around on #forum-monitoring.

Reviewer 6: Why can't OpenShift run it as root?

Reviewer 4: Running this as privileged is not a problem in OCP. We are already running some collectors in privileged containers as part of same node-exporter pod.

Reviewer 6: If that's the case, why was this approach disqualified?

Author: Hi @gnufied, would be useful if you could involve our team in this discussion. Can you link to the slack conversation?

`/var/node_exporter/textfile` directory and exports them.

The Cluster Monitoring Operator will deploy the sidecar when the platform is Baremetal or None by modifying the `node_exporter` [daemonset](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/master/assets/node-exporter/daemonset.yaml). The platform will be detected by querying the `infrastructure` resource.

After that, the maintainence effort will mostly centered on the code the image runs to get health and update its `.prom` file. The logic for this collector can be in a subdirectory of CMO and have it's own OWNERS file allowing the ODF team to own it.

We will be collecting metrics via [libstoragemgmt](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt) and calling it via [libstoragemgmt-golang](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt-golang/).
If a block device is a partion or logical volume, we will only expose health for the parent device.

### Ownership and Maintenance

- The `node_exporter` daemonset creation is owned by the Openshift-Monitoring team. The PR for modifying the daemonset based on infrastructure to include the sidecar can be contributed by ODF, but Monitoring team will have to review.

> - The sidecar image and logic will live in the Cluster Monitoring Operator repo, but maintenance and ownership will be with the ODF team via a OWNERS file.

Author: updated

- A new bugzilla subcomponent will be created under openshift-monitoring, but the default assignee will be ODF and ODF will be responsible for triaging the issues.

### Risks and Mitigations

- The golang bindings for libstoragemgmgt need some review and polish.
  - Mitigation: The ODF(OpenShift Data Foundation) team will contribute to and help the RHEL team maintain libstoragemgmt golang

## Design Details

> Each device will have a metric `storage_device_health` metric associated with it that has a value of 0,1, or 2. Where 0 is healthy state, 1 is a warning state, and 2 is a failed state. Each metric will be labeled by node, device-name, and device-id (where available).

Reviewer 6: Thanks!

> 

Reviewer 6: When we've discussed adding other hardware-related metrics in the past there was some concern about the cardinality of the data and how much new data would need to be processed and stored by Prometheus. Do we have those sorts of concerns for this data?

Author: There are currently plans to add one new metric per storage device.

Reviewer 8: It would be good to provide an estimation of how many timeseries would be exposed overall (e.g. `for a node with N physical storage devices, the exporter would expose (number of metrics) * (number of storage device) = 1*N = N timeseries`).

Reviewer 9: Not sure if this is the right place, but should this proposal also mention how this health status is derived? Will the code look at SMART attributes or the result of SMART test runs or something else entirely?

If this would rely on SMART's testing feature for example, these tests need to be scheduled as well.

I think the implementation choice could inform whether using the textfile collector interface or a stand-alone exporter is preferable. Say, if the health status is determined based on SMART tests, a standalone exporter, that queries the device synchronously might be overly resource intensive, as running those tests is typically done fairly rarely.

| storage_device_health value | Meaning |
| --------------------------- | ------- |
| 0                           | Healthy |
| 1                           | Warning |
| 2                           | Failed  |

### Open Questions

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

- E2E tests will deploy the component and verify that metrics are being emitted per device

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

#### Tech Preview -> GA

#### Removing a deprecated feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

> 

Author: How do we know when prometheus scrapes if we're going for textfile?

> 

Reviewer 6: If I remember correctly, node_exporter reads the file when Prometheus scrapes, but it is up to the external data collection tool to create the file and keep it up to date -- there is no trigger to run the app when scraping occurs.

> 

Author: So we would be polling right? I'll try to gather some data about CPU utilization. We could tune the frequency of polling.

> 

Author: Commented this under drawbacks.

## Alternatives

- Implement in Local Storage Operator:
  - `LocalVolumeDisocveryResults` already enumerate and refresh information about the disk in a per-node `LocalVolumeDiscoveryResult`, and a [PR](https://github.com/openshift/local-storage-operator/pull/249) is in progress to add metrics to each of the daemonsets that update the CR.
  - `LocalVolumeDiscovery` can be configured via `nodeSelector` and `toleration` to match any set of nodes or all nodes. We could have the metrics be for all nodes or just for the ones that LocalVolumeDiscovery is configured to watch. Whether this should be controlled by the same (singleton) CR is an [open question](#Open-Questions    )

- We *could* create a new component for this.

Disqualified alternatives:
- We considered node-problem-detector, but it doesn't export metrics only sets node conditions and creates events.

## Infrastructure Needed

> 

Reviewer 6: We said in the meeting earlier today that we wanted a new repository to be created to hold the reporter image configuration. If you include that detail here, we can work out a good name for it and then the request to DPP for the new repo will be easier to approve.

### User Stories

- As an admin, I would like to be alerted when a storage device is unhealthy and be linked to remediation steps.
- As an admin, I would like if components (such as OpenShift Data Foundation) could access storage device health and failover faster.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Implement a sidecar in the [node_exporter](https://github.com/openshift/node_exporter) component under [Cluster Monitoring Operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator) that will scrape the metrics from the node and export them via the [textfile exporter](https://github.com/openshift/node_exporter/tree/master/text_collectors) (an exporter that scans `.prom` files in the
`/var/node_exporter/textfile` directory and exports them.

The Cluster Monitoring Operator will deploy the sidecar when the platform is Baremetal or None by modifying the `node_exporter` [daemonset](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/master/assets/node-exporter/daemonset.yaml). The platform will be detected by querying the `infrastructure` resource.

> After that, the maintainance effort will mostly centered on the code the image runs to get health and update its `.prom` file. The logic for this collector can be in a subdirectory of CMO and have it's own OWNERS file allowing the ODF team to own it.

Reviewer 9: One implementation detail we might want to call out specifically here that with text collectors its good practice to update the `.prom` file atomically in order to avoid races between the collector and the node_exporter accessing the file.

This can be as simple as this:
```
./exporter_script > metrics.prom.new
mv metrics.prom.new metrics.prom
```

> We will be collecting metrics via [libstoragemgmt](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt) and calling it via [libstoragemgmt-golang](https://github.com/libstorage/libstoragemgmt-golang/).

Reviewer 9: Afair Ceph's smart metric collection is part of the OSD code, so it seems unlikely this can be made into a stand-alone tool.

If a block device is a partion or logical volume, we will only expose health for the parent device.

> ### Ownership and Maintenance

Reviewer 8: We need also to mention the service monitor (if we don't go the textfile collector's route) and the alerting rules. My idea is that they live in the cluster-monitoring-operator (because they need an operator to be deployed) but owned by the ODF team (again it should be feasible to put them in a dedicated directory with separate OWNERS file).

- The `node_exporter` daemonset creation is owned by the Openshift-Monitoring team. The PR for modifying the daemonset based on infrastructure to include the sidecar can be contributed by ODF, but Monitoring team will have to review.
- The collector sidecar image and logic will live in a separate repository owned and maintained by the ODF team.
- A new bugzilla subcomponent will be created under openshift-monitoring, but the default assignee will be ODF and ODF will be responsible for triaging the issues.

### Risks and Mitigations

- The golang bindings for libstoragemgmgt need some review and polish.
  - Mitigation: The ODF(OpenShift Data Foundation) team will contribute to and help the RHEL team maintain libstoragemgmt golang

## Design Details

> Each device will have a metric `storage_device_health` metric associated with it that has a value of 0,1, or 2. Where 0 is healthy state, 1 is a warning state, and 2 is a failed state. Each metric will be labeled by node, device-name, and device-id (where available).

Reviewer 9: Seconded, it would be great to have some details regarding this. This could simply be smarts device health property or be based on various smart counters. How the later is calculated is an interesting detail.

| storage_device_health value | Meaning |
| --------------------------- | ------- |
| 0                           | Healthy |
| 1                           | Warning |
| 2                           | Failed  |

### Open Questions

### Test Plan

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

> - E2E tests will deploy the component and verify that metrics are being emitted per device

Reviewer 8: So I would expect that we have a job running on baremetal and this job should run in the yet-to-be-defined exporter repository as well as github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator?

### Graduation Criteria

**Note:** *Section not required until targeted at a release.*

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
end to end tests.**

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage
- Gather feedback from users rather than just developers
- Write symptoms-based alerts for the component(s)

#### Tech Preview -> GA

- More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale)
- Sufficient time for feedback

#### Removing a deprecated feature

Does not apply

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Implementation History

## Drawbacks

> Because writing files to be read by the textfile collector cannot be done on-demand in response to a request from prometheus, we will have to poll at our own frequency.

Reviewer 8: We could also have the future exporter behave as a regular exporter with a /metrics endpoint.
